                        PART II--OTHER PROVISIONS

SEC. 1251. PRESERVATION <<NOTE: 42 USC 18011.>> OF RIGHT TO MAINTAIN
            EXISTING COVERAGE.

    (a) No Changes to Existing Coverage.--
            (1) In general.--Nothing in this Act (or an amendment made
        by this Act) shall be construed to require that an individual
        terminate coverage under a group health plan or health insurance
        coverage in which such individual was enrolled on the date of
        enactment of this Act.
            (2) Continuation of coverage.--With respect to a group
        health plan or health insurance coverage in which an individual
        was enrolled on the date of enactment of this Act, this subtitle
        and subtitle A (and the amendments made by such subtitles) shall
        not apply to such plan or coverage, regardless of whether the
        individual renews such coverage after such date of enactment.

    (b) Allowance for Family Members To Join Current Coverage.--With
respect to a group health plan or health insurance coverage in which an
individual was enrolled on the date of enactment of this Act and which
is renewed after such date, family members of such individual shall be
permitted to enroll in such plan or coverage if such enrollment is
permitted under the terms of the plan in effect as of such date of
enactment.
    (c) Allowance for New Employees To Join Current Plan.--A group
health plan that provides coverage on the date of enactment of this Act
may provide for the enrolling of new employees (and their families) in
such plan, and this subtitle and subtitle A (and the amendments made by
such subtitles) shall not apply with respect to such plan and such new
employees (and their families).

[[Page 124 STAT. 162]]

    (d) Effect on Collective Bargaining Agreements.--In the case of
health insurance coverage maintained pursuant to one or more collective
bargaining agreements between employee representatives and one or more
employers that was ratified before the date of enactment of this Act,
the provisions of this subtitle and subtitle A (and the amendments made
by such subtitles) shall not apply until the date on which the last of
the collective bargaining agreements relating to the coverage
terminates. Any coverage amendment made pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement relating to the coverage which amends the coverage
solely to conform to any requirement added by this subtitle or subtitle
A (or amendments) shall not be treated as a termination of such
collective bargaining agreement.
    (e) Definition.--In this title, the term ``grandfathered health
plan'' means any group health plan or health insurance coverage to which
this section applies.

SEC. 1252. RATING REFORMS <<NOTE: 42 USC 18012.>> MUST APPLY UNIFORMLY
            TO ALL HEALTH INSURANCE ISSUERS AND GROUP HEALTH PLANS.

    Any standard or requirement adopted by a State pursuant to this
title, or any amendment made by this title, shall be applied uniformly
to all health plans in each insurance market to which the standard and
        individuals and employers.

    (c) Responsibilities of the Secretary.--
            (1) In general.--The <<NOTE: Regulations.>> Secretary shall,
        by regulation, establish criteria for the certification of
        health plans as qualified health plans. Such criteria shall
        require that, to be certified, a plan shall, at a minimum--
                    (A) meet marketing requirements, and not employ
                marketing practices or benefit designs that have the
                effect of discouraging the enrollment in such plan by
                individuals with significant health needs;
                    (B) ensure a sufficient choice of providers (in a
                manner consistent with applicable network adequacy
                provisions under section 2702(c) of the Public Health
                Service Act), and provide information to enrollees and
                prospective enrollees on the availability of in-network
                and out-of-network providers;
                    (C) include within health insurance plan networks
                those essential community providers, where available,
                that serve predominately low-income, medically-
                underserved individuals, such as health care providers
                defined in section 340B(a)(4) of the Public Health
                Service Act and providers described in section
                1927(c)(1)(D)(i)(IV) of the Social Security Act as set
                forth by section 221 of Public Law 111-8, except that
``SEC. 2719A. <<NOTE: 42 USC 300gg-19a.>>  PATIENT PROTECTIONS.

    ``(a) Choice of Health Care Professional.--If a group health plan,
or a health insurance issuer offering group or individual health
insurance coverage, requires or provides for designation by a
participant, beneficiary, or enrollee of a participating primary care
provider, then the plan or issuer shall permit each participant,
beneficiary, and enrollee to designate any participating primary care
provider who is available to accept such individual.
    ``(b) Coverage of Emergency Services.--
            ``(1) In general.--If a group health plan, or a health
        insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance
        issuer, provides or covers any benefits with respect to services
        in an emergency department of a hospital, the plan or issuer

[[Page 124 STAT. 889]]

        shall cover emergency services (as defined in paragraph
        (2)(B))--
                    ``(A) without the need for any prior authorization
                determination;
                    ``(B) whether the health care provider furnishing
                such services is a participating provider with respect
                to such services;
                    ``(C) in a manner so that, if such services are
                provided to a participant, beneficiary, or enrollee--
                          ``(i) by a nonparticipating health care
                      provider with or without prior authorization; or
                          ``(ii)(I) such services will be provided
                      without imposing any requirement under the plan
                      for prior authorization of services or any
